Link to audio file for interview: https://family.justinbehnke.com/media/BobBehnke-PhoneInterview-Jan7th2023.mp3

This is Justin Behnke
Today is Sat Jan 7th 2023
The time is now 7:11pm

I just finished a phone call with my dad, Bob Behnke and I am adding this timestamp to the recording start.

Bob - ...dates 1929, is when Black Tuesday and Black Thursday hit so I guess I never really thought about it that hard. My mom said that things, that finances got difficult and I was assuming it was because of the Depression and then Dorothea, my mom's mom and her dad, my mom's dad, what was his name? August? 

Justin - Ernst

Bob - Ernst yes excuse me, they fought and he threatened to kill her.

Justin - Oh

Bob - And so, they called the minister, and the minister took him.

Justin - Oh okay

Bob - Ma said the fight went on often and grandma Gruenhagen wouldn't let up you know, I don't know.

Justin - that's how she remembers it, is what you are saying?

Bob - Yeah, but I I do remember distinctly that he borrowed money against the farm because someone presented a property in Texas that they were going to drill oil on and it was a, it might have been a Ponzi scheme, I don't know. Mom told me that she often wondered what happened to it, because her Mom turned the paper work, they sold part of the farm, to a Brisshoff, and um, I don't know how much they kept. They had a 270 acre farm, and they sold a big chunk of it off to try to get some relief from the pressure of the interest.

Justin - And that was in Cologne? Do you know where the farm site was?

Bob - Oh yeah, Uncle Herman lived there until he retired and moved into town in Cologne. I bet, I don't know, I was at Herman's house in Cologne.

Justin - And that's Herman Gruenhagen?

Bob - Herman Gruenhagen was my mom's brother yes. And he, you know my dad talked about it more than my mom did, he was the only surviving boy so when he married Adayla they turned the farm over to him with the condition that Adayla and Herman would take care of Dorothea but you know how old people are they just don't die Justin.
 
Justin - yeah I think she died in 1968 or because Ernst died in 1970 so from 1927 until 1970 I mean that's a long time to be in a hospital and I think I remember reading that it was two years before that Dorothea passed away and so both had lived a very long life.

Bob - Ma said that they figured Ernst was well enough to come home but they didn't know what to do with him. They didn't know what to do with him so what I remember was he stayed at the hospital and earned his way there by working in the laundry. 

Justin - Yes the census in St Peter says "laundry helper" so yes I agree with that or I found record that agrees with that 

Bob - Yeah, and so I said to my mom, "Why don't you let him come home?" and my Ma said, "Everything had changed Bobby!" Everything had changed and um I was in the seventh grade when Ernest died and I guess I guess um you're 100% right Dorothy There was a lot a lot of friction between Dorothea and my dad and I mean that my mom was the type of person that was always trying to smooth things over. I don't know I don't know how she took it. But anyways Dorothea died in 1968? 

Justin - I have to double-check that I gotta confirm but on Ernst's death certificate it said that he was widowed 

Bob - Yeah because I think that we went to that funeral in the 59 Ford in 1968, it was a 1968 rambler and I feel like we went to that funeral in that 59 Ford. But I could be mistaken yeah but anyway I don't know when they contacted- I think I told you this before, Herman and Adayla said that Dorothea was getting too much to take care of and so everybody took turns for 2 months at a time. Marie, Hilma, (audio cuts out), I don't think Alvina ever did. Alvina's house was kind of rough and Alvina never had running water inside the house never had a bathroom like Bobby Neisen said, he asked a lady, "Do you have water in the house?" and she said, "In the springtime." 

Bob - Yeah Alvina and I don't think Ernie ever did either. Ernie was her son, was Alvina's son, but my mom and dad took a turn for 2 months and my dad and Dorothea had a tough time getting along and it really ate at my dad and my dad had a big ego Justin. And so, my dad did threaten, I think my dad new that killing people was against the law but he told one guy--he told more than one guy--"If you piss me off, I don't have long to sit in prison because I'm old." and that was just kind of the way my dad was so anyway there was, um, like I say constant conflict between Dorothea and my dad but anyway I didn't call you to put a downer I am sorry to put that on you. 

Justin - No, well I would imagine that a woman who became head of household in 1927 and then maintained that for many years kind of as a single mom probably becomes a little more abrasive and assertive than your average typical woman, whatever that means, I mean regarding Dorothea. 

Bob - Dolores did, I didn't see this but Dolores went to Benton Church, I don't know has anyone ever talk to you about Benton Church?

Justin - Um I have confirmation records from Benton church but what I don't know where it is exactly. Which one is it over there? There are 4 Lutheran church is over in the Benton Township.

Bob - This one's out in the country, not all that far from Dolores and Bernel. And there were a family there called the Henchins most of them have died off even the young ones. Jonathan was the only boy of Herbie and now you're cheering me up here Herbie and Vernon and Vernon never married and Herbie I think his only child was Jonathan and Jonathan is a little younger than me, not too much and they have a sister who is married to Edwin Licham and there were other Henchins too and one of the Henchin family members walked by Grandma Gruenhagen when she was old and she held her cane out and hit him in the shins and said to him, "You do not walk by me without saying 'hello' or 'good morning'."

Justin - Wow. 

Bob - And Dorothea was built like that and so she was confrontational and so was my dad she was confrontational and um it's like taking two cats and tying their tails together you know that's about the best example I can give but anyway when Dolores told that story she had the biggest Jimmy Brown smile she ever had in her life.

Justin - Do you remember--I'm just looking at Google Maps and I wanted to ask, do you know if the Zion Lutheran Church is off of Highway 153 or how can I identify which church it is because it's not called that anymore?

Bob - What um--are you seeing a picture of it when you press on it? Like sometimes when you Google something you can see a picture of it? 

Justin - Yes I do see a picture of it.

Bob - Okay in that picture is there a small harvester silo and a barn? Is there a barn? Because the Stewie Farm is very close to the church I honestly think you could--I probably couldn't--but you could throw a rock from the church to the Stewie house.

Justin - Okay. I can't the google car didn't go close enough.

Bob - Okay then if you go South from the Church. 

Justin - Okay South on 153 comes to a T. 

Bob - And that is County Road 50. 

Justin - Yep that is County Road 50

Bob - Okay then you got the right Church. Hold on a second I've got to look at this text message.

Justin - No problem

[Jump ahead]

Justin - So as I'm looking at this picture it's an A-frame style Church, kind of like the one coming into Belle Plaine, with a spire.

Bob - Yeah it's a Lutheran style Trinity church 

Justin - Okay so the A-frame style was pretty common. And then a right now it looks like there's a school added after with kind of a flat top roof add on, school and then a basketball court behind that there is a house some trees kind of right there. Okay then this is the church. Okay well I can add that to my notations that this is the church where grandma was confirmed and like when were talking about the church in Benton Township we're talking about this one, we're not talking about West Union and we're not talking about, I feel like there was one more but this is the one we're talking about. 

Justin - Um actually let me see so West-um I'm trying to see-Benton Township Minnesota there's East Union there's West Union and then the other Church are actually in... I wish this would tell me what city this is in. It's so stupid--Norwood and then Trinity is over in Carver so when you're out in the boonies of Benton Township you have West Union and East Union and then Zion Lutheran is really by itself so that's got to be the one.

Bob - Oh yeah Zion Church is definitely by itself. 

Justin - Nothing else around their. Great then I can add that to the notes as well.
